Washington (CNN)It is the Trump doctrine laid bare.

By letting Saudi Arabia get away with the murder of US-based journalist Jamal Khashoggi, the President sent a message of startling clarity about how the United States will conduct its business in the world.
Refusing to break with Saudi strongman Mohammed bin Salman over the killing in the Saudi consulate in Istanbul, Trump effectively told global despots that if they side with him -- Washington will turn a blind eye to actions that infringe traditional US values.
Trump signals US won&#39;t punish Saudi crown prince over Khashoggi killing
Trump signals US won't punish Saudi crown prince over Khashoggi killing
But more than that, by stressing the "billions" of dollars in Saudi investment in the US, Trump made clear that Washington has a price, that principles that generations of Americans have cherished, are for sale.
"The world is a very dangerous place! ... It's called America First!" Trump wrote in a statement, effectively repudiating the concept of American Exceptionalism, the idea that the US is embarked on a unique, moral mission exemplified by support for freedom, democracy and universal values.
The President's decision Tuesday to answer the long-running question of how he will respond to the murder of the Washington Post columnist revealed other pillars of the Trump doctrine in one of the most colloquial and oddly stylistic statements on US foreign policy ever written.
It showed a President willing to ignore and prejudge US intelligence assessments that conflict with his political goals.
His readiness to offer impunity to Saudi Arabia represented another blow to the international rule of law and global accountability, concepts Trump has shown little desire to enforce in nearly two years in office.
READ: Trump&#39;s statement on Saudi crown prince and the killing of Jamal Khashoggi
READ: Trump's statement on Saudi crown prince and the killing of Jamal Khashoggi
The President's statement is certain to trigger a fierce clash with Congress, where there is bipartisan momentum to punish Saudi Arabia.
Republican Sen. Bob Corker of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, blasted Trump's response.
"I never thought I'd see the day a White House would moonlight as a public relations firm for the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia," he tweeted on Tuesday.
And it may deepen the estrangement between Trump and the intelligence community, given his rejection of a CIA assessment that the crown prince knew about the killing of Khashoggi.
No room for misunderstanding
Trump's statement was remarkable because it was not just an explanation of Saudi policy. He consciously used the moment to deliver a lesson about how he would wield American power as he redefined the nation's role in the world.
He essentially argued that although the murder of the Washington Post journalist was "terrible" and could not be condoned, it did not merit the disruption of a strategic relationship he has elevated to extraordinary levels.
"We're not going to give up hundreds of millions of dollars in orders and let Russia and China have them ... it's a very simple equation for me. I'm about make America great again," he told reporters.